1. Marcolin et al. (2018) — "Differences in Electromyographic Activity of Biceps Brachii and Brachioradialis While Performing Three Variants of Curl."

2. Jawed et al. (2023) — "Comparison of Electromyographic Activation and Number of Repetitions Completed Between Traditional, Hammer and Reverse Dumbbell Bicep Curl Among Trained Men." AIP Conference Proceedings.

3. Maeo, S., Wu, Y., Huang, M., et al. (2023) — "Triceps Brachii Hypertrophy is Substantially Greater After Elbow Extension Training Performed in the Overhead Versus Neutral Arm Position." European Journal of Sport Science.

4. Boehler, N. (2011, thesis) — "Electromyographic Analysis of the Triceps Brachii Muscle During a Variety of Triceps Exercises." University of Wisconsin–La Crosse.

5. Watanabe, Y. et al. (2025) — "Distinct Muscle Growth and Strength Adaptations After Preacher and Incline Biceps Curls." PubMed (ahead of print).

6. Boeckhk-Behrens, W.U. & Buskies, W. (2000; replicated by Suppversity 2011) — "SuppVersity EMG Series: Musculus Triceps Brachii" — Empirical analysis derived from: Fitness-Krafttraining: Die besten Übungen und Methoden für Sport und Gesundheit.


Brief summaries (search and read abstract and onward for more info):
1. Compared dumbbell curls, barbell curls, and EZ-bar curls. Highest activation of biceps brachii and brachioradialis occurred during EZ bar, and barbell curls also outperformed dumbbells for brachioradialis activation. 
2. Compared traditional supinated curls, hammer curls, and reverse curls for biceps brachii and brachialis. EMG activation of biceps brachii was highest during traditional bicep curls, followed by hammer and then reverse. Brachialis was significantly more activated during reverse curls compared to either of the alternatives.
3. Overhead triceps extension led to larger increases in muscle volume for both the long head and combined lateral and medial heads when compared to neutral position extensions. 
4.Tested EMG on long and lateral heads of triceps in triangle push-ups, kickbacks, overhead extensions, bar pushdowns, rope pushdowns, close-grip bench press, and lying barbell extensions. Between the long and lateral heads there were significant differences during rope and bar pushdowns and lying barbell triceps extensions, while the other exercises acted on both heads uniformly. Triangle push-ups and dips were found to be the most effective for overall activation.
5. Compared preacher curls to incline curls. Preacher curl induced greater increase in volume near the elbow whereas incline curls focused more near the shoulder (possibly difference in brachialis activation)
6. Of 11 tested triceps exercises, cable pushdown emerged as the top activator of the lateral and medial heads. Lots of numerical results to consider from this study to consider. Exercises by activation of lateral and medial head: cable pushdowns, SZ bar triceps extensions, Guillotine presses, followed by dumbbell kickbacks and extensions. For the long head: dumbbell kickbacks and extensions more fit, then SZ bar triceps extensions.



