1. Hajilou et al. (2017) – “The comparison of the electromyography activities in the latissimus dorsi and trapezius muscles during two types of strength training”

2. Snarr et al. (2017) – “Electromyographical comparison of a traditional, suspension device, and towel pull-up”

3. Signorile et al. (2002) – “A comparative electromyographical investigation of muscle utilization patterns using various hand positions during the lat pull-down”

4. Sperandei et al. (2009) – “Electromyographic analysis of three different types of lat pull-down”

5. Buonsenso et al. (2025) – “Electromyographic analysis of back muscle activation during lat pulldown exercise: effects of grip variations and forearm orientation”

6. Andersen et al. (2021) – “Comparison of muscle activity in three single-joint hip extension exercises in resistance-trained women”

7. Doma et al. (2013) – “Kinematic and electromyographic comparisons between chin-ups and lat-pull down exercises”

8. Fenwick et al. (2009) – “Comparison of different rowing exercises: trunk muscle activation and lumbar spine motion, load, and stiffness”

9. Snarr, R.L. & Esco, M.R. (2013) – "Comparison of Electromyographic Activity When Performing an Inverted Row With and Without a Suspension Device." Journal of Exercise Physiology Online.

10. Edelburg, H.R. (2017) – "Electromyographic Analysis of the Back Muscles During Various Back Exercises."

11. García-Jaén, M., Sanchis-Soler, G., Carrión-Adán, A., et al. (2021) – "Electromyographical Responses of the Lumbar, Dorsal and Shoulder Musculature During the Bent-Over Row Exercise." Timisoara Physical Education and Rehabilitation Journal.

12. Youdas, J.W., Amundson, C.L., Cicero, K.S., Hahn, J.J., Harezlak, D.T., & Hollman, J.H. (2010) – "Surface Electromyographic Activation Patterns and Elbow Joint Motion During a Pull-Up, Chin-Up, or Perfect Pullup™ Rotational Exercise." Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research.

13. Lehman, G.J., Buchan, D.D., Lundy, A., Myers, N., & Nalborczyk, A. (2004) – "Variations in Muscle Activation Levels During Traditional Latissimus Dorsi Weight Training Exercises: An Experimental Study." Dynamic Medicine.

14. Harman, J.K., Jacobs, D.A., & Cuchetti, T. (2018) – "A Comparison of Muscle Activation During the Pull-Up and Three Alternative Pulling Exercises." Journal of Physical Fitness, Medicine & Treatment in Sports.



Brief summaries (search and read abstract and onward for more info):
1-5: lots about pulldown variations in grip and form. Largest takeaway: grip variation does not reliably cause significant differences in stimulus, other than narrower grips recruiting more of the posterior deltoid muscles. Not tremendously helpful for comparing pulldowns to many other exercises.
1. Sample size only 12, but trained men. Latissimus dorsi activation was found to be greater for wide-grip lat pulldowns than other variations. All portions of the trapezius were significantly more activated during row exercises than pulldowns.
2. Compared three pull up variations - traditional, suspension device, and towel grips. No significant differences in activation of latissimus dorsi, posterior deltoid, or bicep between variations. Only recognized difference was lessened middle trapezius activation in towel-grip pullups. Main conclusion is pull-up variations have very similar activation of muscle groups.
3. Agrees with findings of Hajilou that wide grip pulldowns produced the greatest latissimus dorsi by a notable margin. Posterior deltoids and chest were more active with narrower grips, while triceps were more active using wide grip. 
4. Amongst behind-the-neck pulldowns, front-of-neck, and v-bar, no difference in latissimus dorsi activation was found between various grips. behind-the-neck performed best for posterior deltoid and bicep activation, perhaps worsening the ability to focus on the lats.
5. Sample size 40; Grip variations in pulldowns do not significantly affect latissimus dorsi activation.

6. Compared RDLs, Roman chair back extension, and seated machine back extension for activation of gluteus maximus, biceps femoris, and erector spinae. RDLs and Roman chair extensions elicited significantly higher glute activation than seated machine back extensions (by 100-140% MVC). Roman chair produced the highest biceps femoris of the three by far, followed by RDLs. All three performed similarly in activation of erector spinae. 
7. Chin-ups produce significantly higher biceps and erector spinae activation than lat pulldowns. Both movements recruited lats similarly, suggesting that chin-ups provide a greater variation/balance in various muscle group activation.
8. Studied inverted bodyweight rows, standing bent-over barbell rows, and one-armed cable rows. inverted row produced the most latissimus dorsi and upper trapezius activation, very lower erector spinae activity. bent-over row produced large and significant activation of practically all upper and lower back muscles (in addition to large load on spine). one-arm cable row induced moderate unilateral trunk activation.
9. Analyzed activation of latissimus dorsi, middle trapezius, posterior deltoid, and biceps brachii during standard inverted rows in comparison to suspension device inverted rows. Only meaningful difference was greater biceps brachii activation during the standard inverted row. 
10. Compared eight exercises total - lat pulldowns, inverted rows, seated rows, bent-over rows, TRX rows, IYT raises, pull-ups, and chin-ups - for activation of middle trapezius, lower trapezius, infraspinatus, latissimus dorsi, and erector spinae. bent-over rows, seated rows, and inverted rows dominated activation of middle trapezius, whereas lower trapezius was most activated from the IYT raises. latissimus dorsi was more activated by pull-ups and chin-ups. 
11. Standing bent-over rows create greater activation of nearly all muscles of the back when compared to chest-supported rows of equivalent nature. Use of chest-support reduced demand on lower-back. Shoulder abduction angle shifted activation toward the deltoid and upper trapezius; adduction better targeted the lats. 
12. Pec major and biceps brachii were significantly more active during chin-ups than pull-ups, while lower trapezius was significantly more active during pull-ups. 
13. Of pulldowns and seated rows with or without scapular retraction, the greatest ratio of latissimus dorsi to biceps activation occurred during wide grip pulldown and seated row. The greatest activation of the middle trapezius and rhomboid occurred during seated rows as well. scapula retraction did not significantly change trapezius activation in this study.
14. Compared EMG of trapezius, latissimus dorsi, biceps brachii, and rectus abdominis in pull-ups, seated lat pulldown, kneeling lat pulldowns, and assisted pull-ups. Seated lat pulldowns produced the lowest rectus abdominis activation of all conditions. Activation contributors for the three non-standard pull-up motions were the following in decreasing order: latissimus dorsi, trapezius, biceps. 








