1. Rodríguez-Ridao, D. et al. (2020) — "Effect of Five Bench Inclinations on the Electromyographic Activity of the Pectoralis Major, Anterior Deltoid, and Triceps Brachii During the Bench Press Exercise." International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health.

2. Pérez-Castilla, A. et al. (2023) — "Electromyographic Activity of the Pectoralis Major Muscle During Traditional Bench Press and Other Variants of Pectoral Exercises: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis." Applied Sciences (MDPI).

3. Snarr, R. & Esco, M. (2014) — "Electromyographic Comparison of Traditional and Suspension Push-Ups." Journal of Human Kinetics.

4. Alizadeh, S. et al. (2020) — "Push-Ups vs. Bench Press Differences in Repetitions and Muscle Activation Between Sexes." Journal of Sports Science and Medicine.

5. Saeterbakken, A.H. et al. (2017) — "The Effects of Bench Press Variations in Competitive Athletes on Muscle Activity and Performance."

6. Andersen, V. et al. (2020) — "A Comparison of Muscle Activation Between Barbell Bench Press and Dumbbell Flyes in Resistance-Trained Males." Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research.

7. Lauver, J.D. et al. (2010) — "An Electromyography Analysis of 3 Muscles Surrounding the Shoulder Joint During the Performance of a Chest Press Exercise at Several Angles." Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research.

8. Upton, D. (2010, thesis) — "Electromyographical Analysis of the Pectoralis Major Muscle During Various Chest Exercises." University of Wisconsin–La Crosse.

9. Saeterbakken, A.H. & Fimland, M.S. — "A Comparison of Muscle Activity and 1-RM Strength of Three Chest-Press Exercises with Different Stability Requirements" — Journal of Sports Sciences (2013)

10. Wattanaprakornkul, D. et al. — "Electromyographic Analysis of Shoulder Muscles During Press-up Variations and Progressions" — Physical Therapy in Sport (2014)

11. Coratella, G., Tornatore, G., Longo, S., Esposito, F., & Cè, E. — "Specific Prime Movers' Excitation During Free-Weight Bench Press Variations and Chest Press Machine in Competitive Bodybuilders" — European Journal of Sport Science (2020)






Brief summaries (search and read abstract and onward for more info):
1. Compared various inclinations of bench-press by activation of all three portions of pec major, anterior deltoid, and triceps brachii. As expected, lower/middle pec activation was greatest for 0 degree inclination, upper pec at 30 degree inclination, and anterior deltoid at 60 degree inclination. Triceps brachii showed similar activation across all bench angles. 
2. Synthesized 23 studies comparing bench press EMG to several other alternatives. Flat barbell bench press activated sternal portion of pectoralis significantly more than inclined bench press. Additionally, standard bench press produced greater overall pectoral activation than almost all alternatives. Decline variant of bench press was found to be superior for activation of sternal and costal portions of pec despite unpopularity. 
3. Suspension (TRX style) pushups produced significantly more activation of pectoral, deltoid, and triceps muscles than traditional pushups, most notably for anterior deltoid. 
4. For equated load between conventional bench press and push-ups, activation of the chest is roughly equivalent, but triceps are favored by the bench press and push-ups impose more anterior deltoid demand as fatigue accumulates.
5. Inclined bench position, in comparison with flat and declined, produced markedly lower triceps brachii activation (opposing study 1) and markedly higher biceps brachii activation. Altering grip width had a notable affect only on activation of biceps brachii activation, preferring medium/wide grip. This study observed notably stable activation of pec major and anterior deltoid across all variants, significant to note considering the study was performed on competitive bench-press athletes suggesting more similar activation across variations as degree of previous training increases.
6. Compared bench press to dumbbell flies by activation of pectoralis major, anterior deltoid, triceps brachii, and biceps brachii. Barbell bench press produced superior activation for all tested muscle groups excluding biceps brachii.
7. Found sternocostal activation to be greatest for bench press in the flat position when compared to any angle of incline.
8. Compared barbell bench press, bent-forward cable crossovers, seated chess prest machine, incline dumbbell flies, and pec deck machine. No significant EMG difference was found in the pec major between barbell bench press, cable crossovers, and pec deck. These two alternatives, though, lagged behind in triceps and anterior deltoid activation, as they attempt to isolate the pectoralis. dumbbell flies and seated chest press did not perform as well.
9. Free weight bench-press was found to induce greater medial deltoid activation than smith machine pressing. The latissimus dorsi was not significantly active for any pressing motion, suggesting that benching does not meaningfully co-activate primary pulling muscles regardless of surface/conditions.
10. Serratus anterior demonstrated greatest activation as a percentage of max isometric contraction across all exercises tested, demonstrating the important of the muscle as a dominant stabilizer in pressing movements.
11. Of multiple inclinations of bench press as well as machine press, the following results were observed: Clavicular head of the pec was least active during machine press, sternocostal head was similarly excited for decline and standard bench pressing but less so for incline press. Triceps brachii excitation was maximized in bench press and decline bench press relative to other exercises. Lateral deltoid was most activated during free-weight variations of pressing. 




